NBC News senior correspondent Tom Brokaw
takes a look back at when National Guard
troops opened fire on protesting
students 50 years ago today Kent State
University may 4th 1970 the tragedy that
day like so much back then was rooted in
the war in Vietnam the trouble started
four days earlier with President Nixon's
announcement that he was widening the
war into Cambodia American units
searching for North Vietnamese troops
and installations but what they will
find or how long they will be here no
one can say for sure Nixon had been
elected on a promise to end the war the
invasion of Cambodia triggered a
firestorm of protests on campuses across
the country
the administration expressed open
contempt for the protesters vice
president Spiro Agnew over privilege
under discipline irresponsible children
of the well-to-do blase permissiveness
and the President himself in an
off-camera remark picked up by an NBC
news microphone you know you see these
bums you know blowing up the campuses
listen the boys that are on the college
campuses today are the luckiest people
in the world
African state the campus was in turmoil
after days of protest the National Guard
was sent in the students ordered to
disperse they refused some threw rocks
the guard used tear gas then without
warning using live ammunition they open
fire
at least a dozen students were hit thora
were killed Sandra of Shire
William Schrader Jeffrey Miller lying
dead in this unforgettable photograph
that made front pages across the country
and Alison Krauss whose grief-stricken
father spoke to reporters she resented
being called a bum she felt at war in
Cambodia was wrong
is this dissent a crime is this a reason
for killing her a White House statement
seemed to blame the students this should
remind us all once again that one
dissent turns to violence it invites
tragedy across the country protests grew
so did an angry backlash in lower
Manhattan anti-war demonstrators who had
lured an American flag to honor the dead
at Kent State were attacked by poets and
hardhats protesters converged on
Washington by the thousands for a
massive anti-war rally buses bring the
White House to keep them out at a
nationally televised press conference
that night almost every question was
about Vietnam Kent State and the deep
division of the country
the president was asked if he would be
willing to reach out to student
protesters I would like to try as best I
can to do that it is not easy sometimes
they as you know talk so loudly that it
is difficult to be heard just hours
later unable to sleep Nixon did try
making a surprise pre-dawn visit to the
Lincoln Memorial to talk to
demonstrators who were camped there the
brief awkward conversation changed no
minds on either side
[Music]
Kent State was memorialized in song by
crosby Stills Nash and young
[Applause]
the tragedy was a shock to the nation
for Richard Nixon it was a turning point
his own chief of staff later called it
the beginning of his downhill slide
toward Watergate but the same week those
four students were cut down 168
Americans were killed in action in
Vietnam and Cambodia and the war dragged
on for another five years 50 years later
Mika's still too shocking unbelievable
that college students protesting on
campus were gunned down that was Tom
Brokaw reporting and our thanks to NBC
News senior producer Andy Franklin and
editor Marshall house felled for putting
together that really incredible report
riveting thank you for that Tom thanks
for checking out MSNBC on YouTube and
make sure you subscribe to stay
up-to-date on the day's biggest stories
and you can click on any of the videos
around us to watch more 4 Morning Joe
and MSNBC thanks so much for watching